Best goals of the week: Philippe Coutinho, Neymar display amazing skills
Some amazing goals were scored this week by football stars around the world as they travel with their teams for pre-season tours. Here is a list of five best goals scored this week which includes a bicycle kick, a free kick and some brilliant display of skills.
The week saw some brilliant football as all the stars are back in action in pre-season tours for their respective clubs. While recently players are settling in their new teams and getting to know their new teammates, old players in the clubs are proving why they deserved to stay in the club.
Here is a list of five best goals scored this week which includes a bicycle kick, a free kick and some brilliant display of skills. Have a look:
 
Neymar Jr shows brilliant footwork to score brace
In the first match he played for Barcelona in their pre-season tour, Neymar showcased amazing skills to score a brace and help his side win against Juventus 2-1 at the International Champions Cup. Neymar dribbled past five defenders for his second goal of the match.

Anthony Martial produces wonderful skills
Manchester United’s Anthony Martial on Sunday dribbled past Real Madrid’s Dani Carvajal, setting Jesse Lingard up with a simple finish at the far post to give United the lead in Santa Clara. The goal gave United an early lead, before the Spanish champions equalised it, taking the game to penalties. United won 2-1 against Los Blancos.

Chris Eriksen scores a long-shot beauty for Tottenham
Eriksen scored from 30 yards at Camping World Stadium against Paris Saint Germain during the International Champions Cup clash that took place last week.

Philippe Coutinho’s free kick goal against Leicester City
Philippe Coutinho’s magic lifted Liverpool to a 2-1 preseason victory over Leicester City in the final of the Premier League Asia Trophy on Saturday.

Clint Dempsey scores a brilliant free kick
Clint Dempsey scored his 57th International goal during the USMNT’s Gold Cup match between USA and Costa Rica. He took a brilliant free-kick in the 83rd minute on Saturday. With the goal, he is now tied with Landon Donovan at the top in the all-time goals list.

Here is hoping the next week takes us to some even more mesmerising goals.
For all the latest Sports News, download Indian Express App