Mets Fall to Athletics and Face Likelihood of Roster Changes Before Trade Deadline
By WALLACE MATTHEWSJULY 23, 2017
Continue reading the main storyShare This Page
Share
Tweet
Email
More
Save
Photo

The Mets’ Michael Conforto hitting a solo home run in the third inning, his third homer of the weekend and his 19th of the season. Credit Elsa/Getty Images
The Mets’ bags were packed and ready to go after Sunday’s 3-2 loss to the Oakland Athletics at Citi Field. But it was difficult to shake the feeling that for some of the players in the Mets’ clubhouse the flight to San Diego to start a 10-game West Coast trip was going to be a one-way journey. No one could say for sure which of the players who departed Sunday night would be on the return flight.

“I haven’t the faintest idea,” Manager Terry Collins said with a laugh when asked before the game if he had a gut feeling about what his roster would look like when the trip ends Aug. 3.

Upgrade or unload? That is the question for General Manager Sandy Alderson, who now has a week to take stock of his team and its chances to play beyond Oct. 1, the last day of the regular season.

The answer could lie in the outcome of the next seven games, four of which will be against the lowly Padres beginning Monday night, followed by three against the Seattle Mariners.

Certainly, the Mets’ just-concluded 10-game homestand, in which they won six games, only muddied the issue.

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE


Eyesore or Blessing? New Safety Feature at Citi Field Divides Fans JULY 23, 2017

KEEPING SCORE
For Mets Fans, Sundays at Citi Field Are No Fun to Watch JULY 22, 2017
“Six-and-four is good, but sometimes it’s not good enough,” Collins said. “Eight-and-two is good enough.”

Math can be cruel, and Collins estimates that winning six of every 10 games the rest of the way will not carry the Mets to where they want to be: in one of the two National League wild-card berths.

By Collins’s reckoning, the Mets needed to win 51 of their 76 games after the All-Star break, and while they showed signs of improvement in the past 10 games, a .600 winning percentage the rest of the way would not cut it.

And losing the finale of this homestand did not leave anyone in the Mets’ clubhouse with the impression that this team had turned the corner.

“We know the situation we’re in,” said Jay Bruce, one of the team’s more productive players this season, which also makes him one of the leading candidates to become an ex-Met by the July 31 trading deadline.

Newsletter Sign UpContinue reading the main story
Sports
Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, delivered to your inbox every week.


Enter your email address
 Sign Up

You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.

SEE SAMPLE PRIVACY POLICY OPT OUT OR CONTACT US ANYTIME
“We knew what we were up against,” said Bruce, who singled and scored, and is hitting .263 with 25 home runs and 65 R.B.I. “We’ve played better baseball of late, but I’m not really able to say yet whether that’s going to be enough or not.”

Bruce, Asdrubal Cabrera, Jose Reyes, Curtis Granderson, Addison Reed, Lucas Duda and Neil Walker are all free agents after the season, which makes them prime candidates to be dealt to teams in the playoff hunt. Especially if the Mets’ front office no longer sees its own team as part of that group.

The loss to the Athletics could not have bolstered Alderson’s perception that the Mets were headed for big things this season.

Starter Rafael Montero pitched reasonably well, lasting seven innings, but he also surrendered three home runs, to Marcus Semien, Khris Davis and Matt Chapman. They were all solo shots, but with the Mets limited to five hits by Oakland starter Daniel Gossett — including a solo home run by Michael Conforto, his third homer of the weekend and his 19th of the season — they were enough to ensure another loss for Montero (1-7) and the Mets, ending the team’s four-game winning streak.

“Two hanging sliders killed him,” Collins said of Montero.

After the series against the Padres and the Mariners, the Mets will have an off day on July 31, the trading deadline. A few of the players on the Mets’ roster could be heading to new teams before they start a three-game series against the Colorado Rockies on Aug. 1.

“Obviously, the fact that this could be the last home game for a lot of us here is a bit odd, but nothing happens until it happens,” Bruce said. “We don’t know for sure, and we’ll just see how it goes.”

Bruce, who was traded from the last-place Cincinnati Reds to the Mets at last season’s deadline and wound up playing in the N.L. wild-card game, knows that a deadline trade is not necessarily a bad thing.

“What it all boils down to is if you have the opportunity to go somewhere, the likelihood of you getting into a wild-card race or a pennant race is high,” Bruce said. “That’s why you play the game. You’d like to experience something like that.”

Bruce’s teammates would no doubt agree. For some of them, however, the question is where?