Toronto Gets Late Draw Against New York City F.C.
JULY 20, 2017
Continue reading the main storyShare This Page
Share
Tweet
Email
More
Save
Photo

Toronto’s Victor Vazquez just before scoring on a penalty kick in stoppage time to secure a draw with New York City F.C. Credit Brad Penner/USA Today Sports, via Reuters..
Victor Vazquez drilled a penalty kick past Sean Johnson in the first minute of stoppage time, and Toronto F.C. escaped with a 2-2 draw at New York City F.C. Jordan Hamilton was clipped and taken down by New York City F.C.’s R. J. Allen in the penalty area in the 90th minute, setting up Vazquez’s penalty kick for his fourth goal of the season.

Toronto (11-3-6) moved a point ahead of Chicago for the Eastern Conference and overall M.L.S. lead. After Ashtone Morgan gave Toronto an early 1-0 lead, New York City F.C. (10-6-4) responded with back-to-back scores. David Villa netted his 13th goal in extra time of the first half, and Maximiliano Moralez made it 2-1 in the 56th minute.

RED BULLS ROUT EARTHQUAKES Daniel Royer scored twice in a minute late in the Red Bulls’ 5-1 victory over the San Jose Earthquakes in Harrison, N.J. Royer scored the first of his late goals in the 90th minute. The five goals were the most the Red Bulls (9-8-2) have scored this season and the most the Earthquakes (7-8-5) have allowed.

BASEBALL

Arenado Helps Rockies Pound the Padres

Nolan Arenado lined three home runs as part of his five-hit afternoon and tied a career high with seven R.B.I., helping the Colorado Rockies complete a three-game sweep of the San Diego Padres with an 18-4 victory in Denver.

Trevor Story and Charlie Blackmon also homered, and the Rockies had a season-high 21 hits. Gerardo Parra ran his streak of reaching base to 10 straight plate appearances over three games before flying out in the fifth.

Continue reading the main story
MONTGOMERY LIFTS SURGING CUBS Mike Montgomery hit his first home run and allowed two hits and one run in six innings to lead the streaking Chicago Cubs to an 8-2 win over the Braves in Atlanta. Javier Baez hit a three-run homer for Chicago, which stretched its season-best winning streak to six games since the All-Star break.

AROUND THE MAJORS Dustin Pedroia drove in three runs, Drew Pomeranz (10-4) pitched three-hit ball into the seventh inning, and the Red Sox beat the Toronto Blue Jays, 5-1, in Boston. James Paxton (9-3) had another strong start against the Houston Astros, and Ben Gamel powered the offense with a two-run homer to give the visiting Seattle Mariners a 4-1 win. Sonny Gray struck out six, pitching into the seventh in what might prove his final home start in Oakland if the club deals him before the trading deadline, and the Athletics rallied to beat Tampa Bay, 7-2. J. D. Martinez bruised his left hand, forcing him out of his debut with the Arizona Diamondbacks, and the Reds ended a five-game losing streak with a 4-3 win in Cincinnati that was capped by Adam Duvall’s bases-loaded single in the 11th inning.

Newsletter Sign UpContinue reading the main story
Sign Up for the Sports Newsletter
Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.


Enter your email address
 Sign Up

You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services.

SEE SAMPLE PRIVACY POLICY OPT OUT OR CONTACT US ANYTIME
PRO FOOTBALL

Dallas Police Suspend Elliott Inquiry

The Dallas police have suspended an investigation into a bar encounter linked to Ezekiel Elliott, the Cowboys’ star running back.

The police said that the investigation was suspended “due to the lack of a complaint” and that no other witnesses had come forward. The statement said investigators had made several unsuccessful attempts to reach a 30-year-old man who was punched in the nose Sunday night.

PANTHERS BRING BACK EX-G.M. The Carolina Panthers rehired Marty Hurney as their interim general manager. Hurney, who was the general manager from 1998 to 2012, replaces Dave Gettleman, who was fired this week.

Hurney drafted quarterback Cam Newton, linebackers Luke Kuechly and Thomas Davis, center Ryan Kalil and defensive end Charles Johnson, and he traded for tight end Greg Olsen — all of whom are team captains.

PRO BASKETBALL

Ginobili Says He’s Returning to Spurs

Manu Ginobili appears to be putting off retirement for at least another season. Ginobili, a forward who turns 40 on July 28, tweeted that he was re-signing with San Antonio. Ginobili, a 6-foot-6 guard, has been a part of four of the Spurs’ five N.B.A. championships. Ginobili averaged 7.5 points and 18.7 minutes a game last season.

CHARLES LEADS LIBERTY PAST SUN Tina Charles had 28 points and 17 rebounds to help the Liberty beat the Connecticut Sun, 96-80, at Madison Square Garden. Charles scored 10 points in the third quarter, showing off a dazzling array of moves in the post as the Liberty (10-9) turned a 4-point halftime lead into a 20-point advantage. It was her ninth double-double of the season.

SWIMMING AND DIVING

U.S. Claims Its First Gold of Worlds

The United States claimed its first gold medal of the world championships in Budapest with another victory in the women’s five-kilometer open water race.

Ashley Twichell crossed the line three and a half seconds ahead of Aurélie Muller of France, giving the Americans their third straight world title in the shortest of the open-water races. Twichell bounced back after finishing 10th in the 10-kilometer race on Lake Balaton, about 80 miles southwest of Budapest.